perhaps the most misunderstood and
misrepresented image in jordan
Peterson's best-selling book 12 rules
for life is the image of the male
lobster fighting for dominance in a
hierarchy we all ignore way down at the
depths at the bottom of the ocean it's
an image with real pathos it's an image
that elicits pity it's an image that in
some ways shows the tragic futility of
struggles to to be someone to be an
important person to be on the to be on
the top of the heap a hung struggling
away in the obscurity 10,000 Leagues
Under the Sea to be the lobster that
gets to push other lobsters around I
think this image has been remembered in
public consciousness and in political
discourse as if it were a justification
for social inequality as if it were a
rationalization of as if war an argument
offered in support of the type of
extreme inequality seen today and some
some capitalist dystopias split that way
that's neither the psychological nor
philosophical nor political function of
this image in the book I was really
surprised to find on finally reading the
primary source text that his point is
ultimately to offer a justification for
why he and his daughter depend on SSRI
antidepressant drugs the most bizarre
plot twist comes up after we have a few
pages discussing how dejected and
depressed the lobsters become
who are in his words lobster losers
lobsters who are not in the the
fortunate minority and then he he takes
several several leaps of intuition on
the basis that reported claim reported
studies about the significance of
serotonin in in lobsters brains now
there are many many different ways in
which this is kind of misleading and
even factually wrong it's very strange
to me that Jordan Pearson has managed to
live through the debunking of
antidepressant medication the you know
widespread well researched extensively
published controversy that you know
turned all of the assumptions of bio
psychiatry inside out and upside a
linear neural exam
it's very strange to me that he's lived
through the the proliferation of human
addiction to psychiatric medication
abuse of prescription drugs becoming of
evermore epidemic portions that he's
lived through this and he never
developed more of a critical perspective
on you know the use of antidepressants
but what he's doing here in the truest
sense of the word pathetic it's the
pathos of a man who wants to go back to
the drawing board and reinterpret
evolution reinterpret the nature of
nature in order to offer a justification
for his own drug habit long after the
pseudo scientific rationale for that
drug habit has been debunked and it's
been debunked within his own profession
within his own area of research within
his area his remit of academic expertise
you know I wouldn't feel that I was
being fair Jordan Peterson if I came
here and I really harshly interrogated
what he says about Taoism I obviously
know
more about Taoist philosophy Taoist
religion than the Jordan Pearson knows
or ever will know I would feel dishonest
if I were raking him over the coals and
cross-examining him for what he says
about Buddhism
Jordan Peterson has no expertise in
Buddhism to some extent this is to be
excused or I don't shrug it off with a
laugh these things are far far removed
from his supposed area of expertise but
the matter of SSRI antidepressant drugs
they're important in our their
importance in our culture and society
and even their importance for him and
his family on the the microcosm level
that should be right in his strike zone
he should be able to really knock it out
of the park and instead what we see is a
man who has really been demented by kind
of self-centered self justification a
man clinging from Enoch who could go so
far he goes so far as to say that the
the lobsters who are losers in the
hierarchy that they want to feel like
winners and that the only way they can
do this much like humans in our own
society is by recovering their serotonin
now there are many different ways in
which the mono I mean mono amine
hypothesis the assumptions about
serotonin levels have been debunked and
refuted one of the most fundamental is
that the assumption that low serotonin
levels correspond to depression either
the feeling of depression or depressive
behaviour that has been debunked they're
not correlated or linked at all which
was proven with horrible laboratory
studies as you can imagine um that that
association was false and originated in
marketing claims it never originated
originated in falsifiable scientific
data now furthermore for certain many
videos there's a real smoking gun piece
of evidence in that we have SSRI drugs
and then we have drugs with the
opposite effect called SSR II drugs and
the effects that these drugs have on
depression are identical so you know if
you have drugs that raise people's blood
pressure and you have drugs that lower
people's blood pressure but they both
have the same effects on depression
that's proof that blood pressure
medication doesn't treat depression or
the blood blood pressure is not linked
to depression in this way there's not
this kind of question so this has been
debunked many different angles I have
many different videos on this channel in
which I'm just quoting and relaying to
you information from experts who devoted
decades their lives decades their lives
not just at doing the research but to
getting out in the public sphere and for
pounding it to overcome you know frankly
the the marketing hype um but let's just
step back and ask hypothetically what if
Jordan Peterson were right what if the
philosophy he was presenting here were
based on unfactual II true assumptions
wouldn't that be the most pathetic
philosophy of all what he's arguing is
that he and his daughter are born losers
and he said this in many ways and those
of you for him talk especially the
interviews he's done interviews of the
daughters an accent that they were born
with disabilities that they were born
with disadvantages and the only way he
can be happy is by chemically inducing
the illusion that he's a winner
by taking serotonin reuptake inhibitors
by taking this this class of drugs what
a what an absolutely terrible bleak
vision of the universe the vision of the
universe that from day one there have
always been a small number of lobsters
who claw their way to the top of the
pile top of the social hierarchy and
that nobody else can really be happy and
that he identifies himself with those
with those losers
with the lobsters at the bottom of the
pile who are shamed humiliated have
their confidence broken again to what
extent he's misrepresenting the science
about lobsters I don't know I know the
science about human beings in serotonin
but he he goes to he goes so far as to
say that the lobsters who lose have to
dissolve their brains and grow a new
brain to take on a new a new attitude a
new place in their society doesn't
doesn't sound like science but maybe
there's some grain of truth there but
he's poetically exaggerating or or what
have you you know there there are drugs
that can help you cope with unhappiness
sorrow in your life short-term on a
shallow basis one of the most effective
you know is is nicotine and if you
really read the scientific literature
about what are the effects of nicotine
you'll realize that it's one of the most
powerful and underappreciated
antidepressants it's one that people
have relied on for centuries and of
course the main reason we don't glorify
it as an antidepressant is that it's bad
it's bad in many different way it's not
just because it gives you cancer for one
thing it cultivates emotional dependence
on the drug but you know I've read real
scientific literature on this one of the
reasons why nicotine is so addictive
is that when you're low it raises you up
just a little bit it helps you focus it
helps you actually raise your stress
levels
when you're feeling despondent so when
you're really low really depressed
actually stress is in a sense positive
you take on focus and have a sense of
objective you get you gain stress in a
positive sense coming from a lobe but
when you're too stressed out when you
feel nervous when you feel anxiety when
stress is overwhelming then it brings
the stress levels day home so nicotine
addiction helps to keep you in this this
narrow band and many people who are
long-term smokers long-term smoking
addicts this is consistent with what
they report subjectively that when they
first wake up in the morning they need a
cigarette when they're
when they're really dejected they need a
cigarette but then on the other hand
when they're stressed out with a problem
when they need to calm down
they also need a cigarette they feel
this intuitively then apparently there's
hard science to back up this element of
you know this element of the science of
addiction as it applies to dissonance if
what Peterson was saying were true about
antidepressants if what he was saying
were true about evolution and inequality
and even just his places hit his place
in US and his daughter's place he would
seem to me that the inevitable
conclusion of the string opening chapter
of this this now influential book this
book that I can't really regard as
anything more than the the aimless
mutterings of a madman the conclusion
would have to be that we live in a world
of unfair competition and the way to
cope with that unfairness is to become a
drug addict just like you